In this lecture, you'll learn about the boot up process on your routers and switches, and to understand
how they boot up, you need to know about the different memory locations on your device.
There's four built-in memory locations.
First up, we have ROM, the Read Only Memory.
Then, we have Flash. On older devices, that will be installed in the cache on the motherboard. On newer
devices,
it's a removable CompactFlash card.
Then, we've got NVRAM, the Non-Volatile RAM,
and finally, the RAM, the normal Random Access Memory.
You can also use an external USB memory stick plugged into the device as well.
Okay, so first one is Read Only Memory, the ROM, and that is what is used when the device is first powered
on. ROM has got two main functions,
First is the Power On Self Test. The POST test will check for any problems with the hardware.
It will then load the bootstrap, and the bootsrap will look in Flash for an
IOS software image to load
next. If an IOS image can't be found in flash then the device will show the ROMMON prompt at the command
line.
That means the device has failed to boot up
if you see a command prompt that says ROMMON. The ROM Monitor, that's what it stands for. That can be used
to recover a missing or corrupted software image.
In that case, you can boot from USB or an external Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP) server to recover
the device. The instructions for doing that can be slightly different depending on the model of router
or switch that you need to recover.
So to get instructions, just search in Google for 'Cisco ROMMON  Recovery' for your particular platform.
We'll have a look at that at the end of the lecture
when I do a lab demo.
Okay, so we had the ROM memory
and then the Flash memory. So, ROM does a POST test and loads up the bootstrap, which then looks in Flash
memory for an IOS system image.
It will load the first image that it finds there by default, but you can override that with the 'boot
system' command.
Now, when you get the device initially from the factory, it's just going to have one software image on
there. But you can upgrade that device because Cisco come out with newer versions of the software regularly.
So, in that case, you can download the new version of the operating system, and then you can copy it down to
Flash. In that case,
you'll have two copies, two different system images on Flash now.
So when the system boots up, you're going to need to tell it which one to boot from. It will default to
choosing the first one. To make sure that you get the newer image, the command to use is 'boot system'
and then 'flash' and then the system image name. That's a global configuration command. Next type of memory
is NVRAM.
When the system has finished loading the IOS system image from Flash, it will then load the start-
up config, configuration file from NVRAM, and the saved start-up config then becomes the current
running-config in RAM.
If no start-up config file was found, then the system will load the Setup Wizard.
If no start-up config file was found, it's because you just factory reset it, or it just actually
come from the factory. Whenever you enter a command in IOS, it takes effect immediately and goes into the
running-config in RAM. To make your changes permanent across a reboot,
we do the 'copy running-config start-up config' command, and that copy it into NVRAM, which will
be used the next time the system boots up.
The reason it's designed like this is so if you're working on the router or a switch, and you make some
kind of catastrophic error, and then you can't get to the switch or router anymore, you can just pull
the power out of the back, put the power back in,
boot it back up again, and it will boot back up with the old startup-config before you'd made the error
in the running-config that caused you to lose connectivity to the command line.
Okay, the last type of built-in memory is RAM,
the Random Access Memory. So, the IOS system image and the start-up config
are loaded from Flash for the system image, and from NVRAM for the startup-config into RAM during boot up.
And RAM is then used as a normal working memory of the device, and if you're wondering, "Well, why don't
we just keep everything in RAM then?"
The reason is that RAM is volatile memory.
It does not survive a power outage or a reboot, so we can't keep the files in there that we need to keep
permanently.
They need to be saved in persistent storage like our Flash and our NVRAM. A couple of other things
to tell you,
first up, the VLAN database. That file is the 'vlan.dat' file.
It's just on a switch where it saves the VLAN information, and that is saved in either Flash or NVRAM,
depending on the model of the switch.
I know we haven't covered VLANs yet.
Don't worry, we'll cover that in a later section.
I'm just mentioning it now as we talk about the different memory locations. The last thing, the system
can also load a system image and/or startup-config from an external TFTP server rather than from Flash
or NVRAM.
That is not recommended, though, because the device will not be able to boot if it loses connectivity to that
TFTP server.
So, the only reason you would ever really do that is if you want to load a new version of the system
image and there's not enough Flash memory capacity on your device to store that.
Then, you can save it to an external TFTP server instead and boot from there. But, really, not recommended
because if you lose connectivity to TFTP server, your device won't be able to boot.
Okay, so that was all the information.
Last thing is to give you a demonstration of all this in the lab.